Hello, I'm Allan Schaffe,
the Game Technologies Evangelist
at Apple.
In this presentation,
I'm going to cover some of the
techniques that OpenGL ES based games
can use to tune their performance,
with a particular focus on 2D games.
And of course,
many of these same concepts will
apply to tuning 3D rendering as well.
And I'll be using a new
instrument included with Xcode 4,
called the OpenGL ES Analyzer.
This is something that many of
you saw a preview of at WWDC 2010,
but it's definitely worth
taking another look at now and
trying it out with your titles.
So, let's get started.
Now, as you probably know,
OpenGL ES is the interface for
high performance rendering in iOS,
designed to let you take advantage of
the 3D graphics hardware in our devices.
And it's the API being used in most
of the games on the App Store today.
Now, typically when we think
of OpenGL ES based games,
what immediately comes to mind
are first person shooters,
and out the window simulation type games,
and adventure games, and so on.
Where the world is being presented in 3D,
and we're moving through it
blasting bad guys with really rich,
detailed characters,
and a realistic environment.
But actually,
the use of OpenGL ES is quite
widespread in 2D games as well,
in a number of genres.
So, here's a few examples.
The first is Plants vs.
Zombies,
a tower defense game from PopCap.
Now,
everything you see here is a 2D sprite.
The backdrop, the characters, the text,
and so on.
And if you're familiar with this game,
you know that the characters are
articulated at their joints as well.
But all this animation is
just being done with sprites.
And the next is Osmos for iPad.
This is a gorgeous physics
puzzler from Hemisphere Games.
This game has a lot happening on screen
that gives it a really rich 3D look.
But, once again, this is many layers of
alpha textured graphics.
2D sprites being drawn in OpenGL ES.
Then there's Fruit Ninja by
Halfbrick Studios.
So here's OpenGL ES being
used in a 2D action game,
but with a really interesting twist.
The backdrop, the swipes,
the fruit splatters,
and the text are all done
with alpha textured sprites,
but each piece of fruit
is actually rendered as 3D
geometry for extra realism.
And the result just looks great.
Here's another.
We can also see OpenGL ES being used in
a lot of card games and the casino genre.
This is World Series of Poker:
Hold'em Legend from Glue,
where as before,
everything on screen is a 2D sprite.
The backdrop, the cards,
the player avatars,
and they take advantage of OpenGL for
things like chip animations and so on.
Now a couple more examples.
Here's Harbormaster HD by Imanji Studios.
This is a line drawing
and chaos management game,
where you're guiding boats
into their docks on screen,
and once again,
everything on screen is being rendered
in layers of 2D sprites using OpenGL ES.
And then finally,
one that many of you are
familiar with is Angry Birds,
with in this case,
Angry Bird Seasons by Rovio.
Now,
every object on screen is one of a series
of different 2D alpha textured sprites.
So what this is meant to illustrate
is that even though OpenGL ES is
usually associated with first
person real time 3D graphics,
that actually its usage is even
more widespread into all the
varieties of game genres that
center around 2D scenes as well.
So what about your game?
If you're writing a 2D based
game and using OpenGL ES,
or a game engine or a third party
framework layered on top of it,
how can you make sure that your
game performs as well and looks
as good as these other very,
very popular games?
Well, I'll start by looking at what some
of these games can have in common,
and then we'll see how to tune for that.
What you see in common
among almost all of them is,
of course, widespread usage of OpenGL ES,
and it's being used to render quads
or sprites with alpha textures.
Now, typically each quad is
being drawn separately,
and quite often each quad is
carrying around with it a lot
of its own graphics state.
And so the amount of overhead involved in
rendering the scene is really quite high.
It's also very common for these
games to have a top-down or side-on
view or false perspective view.
Sometimes with a really large level
that you're panning around and a
lot of off-screen game elements.
So the approach that we'll use
to tune for this situation breaks
down into these four steps.
First, we'll do a really detailed
analysis of the OpenGL ES activity
happening in the game.
Then we'll walk through what we
find and work on eliminating state
changes and optimizing the draw calls.
And there's some well understood
techniques that we'll use for doing that.
Then once that's taken care of,
at the end I'll have a few
pointers for some further
optimizations that you can make.
So let's start with
measuring OpenGL ES activity.
Now, in the past,
this has been a little bit challenging.
It's actually not very easy to
just look at the source code of a
game and intuitively figure out the
linear stream of OpenGL commands that
it's going to send down to the GPU.
Your game might end up doing a
lot more work than you thought,
sending more commands that you realized,
or if you're traversing
some data structure,
that might result in sending work
to OpenGL in some unexpected order,
causing extra state changes.
Or, you might just be doing
the wrong kind of work,
either by having a lot of overhead
or going down some non-optimal path.
And so,
actually measuring and analyzing the
OpenGL activity coming from your game
becomes critical in knowing what's going
on and understanding what you need to do.
And now there's a great tool that
can help you with this called the
OpenGL ES Analyzer Instrument.
This is a new instrument included with
Xcode 4 that'll record and measure
the OpenGL ES activity in your app,
analyze that data,
and find specific correctness
and performance issues,
and then provide you with
instructions on what to do about them.
Now, the analyzer has three
main parts that you'll use.
The first is the activity monitor.
This records a trace of all the
OpenGL ES activity in your app,
and provides you with statistics
about what's being called,
how much time it took,
the number of calls,
the stack trace that each
GL call was being made from,
and so on.
Then the second part are the overrides.
And these are basically global
switches that will bypass specific
parts of the graphics pipeline,
such as fragment processing
or texture lookup.
And by turning on and off
certain parts of the pipeline,
you can very quickly identify where
your application is bottlenecked.
And the third component
is the OpenGL ES Expert,
and it's amazing.
So this is an expert system
with knowledge of our hardware
characteristics and the best practices
for our OpenGL ES implementation.
And it watches the trace coming
into the activity monitor
and looks at the statistics,
and then tells you exactly
what trouble spots it sees,
and even better,
exactly what you need to do to fix them.
It's just incredible.
So, let's take a look at a demo of
the OpenGL ES Analyzer instrument.
Alright,
so first let's take a look at the
demo that we're going to profile.
I have it loaded on this phone here.
So what you can see here is all of
this is being drawn in OpenGL ES.
It's a bunch of 2D sprites.
I'm drawing a quad for the background,
a quad for the spacecraft,
and the fuel display,
and the lander at the bottom.
And then all of these particles
floating in are quads as well.
Okay, and I can move things around,
and the particles follow the spaceship.
So it's a very simple demo,
not a very fun game.
But it's what we'll be using to profile.
So let's take a look at it now in
the OpenGL ES analyzer instrument.
So I'm going to run the instrument here.
And it comes up with,
and allows me to choose a template.
I'm going to choose OpenGL ES Analysis.
I'll choose my target,
which is this demo in its before state.
Okay,
and now let me just start by running
this application for just a few
seconds and collect some data,
and then I'll give you a tour
around what you see being collected.
So I'm capturing a few frames here,
and that's probably enough, 23,
25 frames.
Okay, so I start out in this view,
which is the OpenGL ES Analyzer Expert.
And I'm actually going to come
back to this later in the talk,
so let me skip over that for now.
But by pulling down this tab,
you can see a lot of different
statistics and different kinds of
data that we can get access to.
And I want to start with
the frame statistics.
So I ended up actually drawing 43 frames,
and you can see here the number
of triangles that I've rendered,
the number of batches or
draw calls that I've made,
the total number of GL calls,
and redundant state changes.
And actually,
I control what statistics are
gathered up here by this disclosure.
And so let me zoom into that.
So this is a list here of the frame
statistics that I've chosen to observe,
the batches, GL calls, state changes,
and triangles.
And in this particular demo,
all I'm drawing are triangles.
So that's why I've selected
triangles rendered here.
But if I was drawing points
and lines or other objects,
I'd probably want to look
at a few other statistics.
But okay,
so let's take a look just first,
what do we see here?
Well,
down in the number of triangles rendered,
each frame is only rendering
a thousand triangles,
but it's taking me 500 GL draw
calls to actually render that.
So that's 500 calls to GL draw arrays.
And really,
it's not a very complex scene.
And the next thing to look at is this,
the number of GL calls.
So again, 500 objects are being
rendered on screen into quads.
But it's taking nearly 8,000
OpenGL calls for me to draw that object.
And so that means that there must be
a lot of state changes going on here.
And then third, if I come over,
there's also a lot of redundant
state changes happening.
Almost a thousand per frame,
or basically two for every
one of these batches.
So that's something that
we'll want to take a look at.
But so that's the frame statistics view.
Okay,
so now let's look at the API statistics.
So what this is,
is a list of all of the OpenGL calls
your application is making.
It tells you how many times
you're calling each routine,
the total amount of time for each call,
and then the average
of each call as well.
So what I like to do here is to
sort this list by the total time,
and look to see what calls are
really taking the most time.
So let me zoom in.
I would always expect for draw calls,
like GL draw arrays or GL draw elements,
to dominate this graph
and to be up at the top.
If they're not, that's something that
you should look into.
But then the next thing to do is
to just try to see a few calls,
what calls that are happening next,
that look like they're kind of expensive.
And there's a few here.
GL enable client state, GL bind texture,
GL disable client state.
We're calling these a lot of times.
And the total amount of time that
they're taking is rather significant.
So now the trick for this, though,
is actually...
If you don't know what you're
really looking for here,
is to find the call to
Eagle Present Render Buffer,
and then look at everything
that's above it in the list.
And those are really the calls that
you can spend the most time on,
and probably get the
most benefit from tuning.
And so we have a pretty good
list here of different calls.
Draw arrays, text image to load texture,
we have enable, and so on.
And there's one more
thing that you can do,
actually, and that's to enable
single frame navigation,
and go and look at a particular frame.
Say I'll just choose frame 25.
And you can see which
calls here are being made,
and exactly the count of how many
times they're being called per frame.
And actually, this is already now telling
me about a likely problem.
I'm calling GL draw arrays 500 times,
GL enable almost twice
for every draw arrays,
and enable and disable client
state twice for every draw arrays,
and so on.
So I can see that I'm really doing a lot
of work for every call to draw arrays.
And the reason why this is
important is because each of those
calls to draw arrays is really
only resulting in a single call.
And so this is a lot of overhead being
set up for really very little output.
Okay, so that's what the
API statistics can show you.
Then next,
I'll show you just the call trees.
So this is a lot like the API analyzer
where you can just see the call trees
for each of the rendering calls in your
app and how much time they're taking.
So in this case,
I don't need to go into that,
but it's there for you if you
want to take advantage of it.
And then last is the trace.
So really, this is where I like to
spend the most time when I'm
analyzing an OpenGL application,
is to just look and see what calls
are really being made every frame.
And this is the best way for you to
actually see the linear trace of calls
if you have really complex source code or
some intricate data structure that you're
using that's resulting in all of this.
And so the trick to do,
as I zoom in on this,
And what you should do is try to think
of how your code is structured and try
to correlate what you see in this list
to one object being drawn on screen.
And here, for example,
I can see that all of this
is correlating to one object.
Because I know from my code that every
object starts with a call to push matrix,
and then a translation,
some state gets set up,
and then finally here
I call GLDrawArrays.
And then I unwind all that, pop matrix,
and call getError.
So these are the calls that I am making
per object for everything in the scene.
So every particle, the background,
the lander, and so on.
And so what we'll do is take a
look at this now and see if there's
ways to optimize calls out of this.
Now, if you have a lot of different
objects and kinds of objects,
you might have to do,
you might have to repeat this process
two or three times or multiple times
to go back and really cover all
of the cases that are in your app.
In mine, it's pretty simple.
Everything is just being drawn as a quad,
and it's being drawn using these,
generally the same routines here,
just changing the position and
changing the texture for each one.
But so that's the API trace.
All right, again, that was the
OpenGL ES Analyzer instrument,
which is going to help you measure
and analyze the OpenGL ES activity
in your application.
So you just saw the frame statistics,
the API stats, the command trace,
and the call trees.
And at the end of the talk,
I'll go into more detail
about the Analyzer Expert.
So now let's go back and remember
some of the problems we found.
The first thing we found
was that in this demo,
the number of triangles
per batch was much too low.
Each frame of the demo
had 500 draw calls,
and this resulted in only
1,000 triangles on screen.
And what this really indicates
is that your vertex arrays
are just much too short.
Only sending two triangles here for
each draw call is just terrible.
So you want to try to minimize the number
of batches and make that ratio much,
much higher, so that each batch,
each draw call,
takes care of a lot of triangles.
Problem number two.
The number of GL calls
for each batch was much,
much too high.
So this indicates that we're carrying
around a lot of overhead for every
object that's being drawn on screen.
And what this means is that
there's a lot of state management
happening between each draw call.
In this case we have 500 draw calls
and nearly 8,000 GL calls per frame,
which is about 16 to 1, and that's much,
much too high.
You really want to minimize the
number of GL commands that are being
issued for each of your draw calls.
Then third, redundant state changes.
So these are just totally unnecessary.
When you see these happening,
it means that you've changed
the OpenGL state to the same
value that it already had,
which is totally redundant.
But it still causes work to
occur in the implementation.
So if this is happening,
it's something that has ultimately no
effect and just doesn't need to occur,
which is a perfect thing to optimize.
So we'll need to make changes in our
code to avoid making redundant calls.
Now fourth, on to the API Statistics view
and things to look for there.
Well first, as I said,
we expect to see GLDraw arrays
or GLDraw elements dominating
the total time on this graph.
Of course, if it's not,
that's something to look into,
but it is at the top here.
So the next thing to look
at are the next few commands
that are taking the most time.
And see if these are things that can
be eliminated one way or the other.
And specifically,
my rule of thumb is to find
everything with a higher total time
than Eagle Present Render Buffer.
And tuning those calls will
give you the most payoff.
And then finally,
look at the command trace itself,
because this is really telling you the
truth about your application's rendering.
And the best way to do this is to
enable single frame navigation,
then go to a frame that
you want to look at,
and try to identify the calls
that correlate to the various
objects being drawn on screen.
Now, in my demo, it's easy to find,
because I know that every object
starts with a call to GL Push Matrix,
and ends with
GL Pop Matrix and GL Get Error.
So now I can look at this,
and really understand what's happening
in GL for every object I draw.
And this is a lot,
16 GL commands per object.
So you should do the same thing.
Try to find the different
objects you draw,
and see what work is really
being done on their behalf.
So let's take this example now and
really dig into it line by line.
So here it is.
This is what I'm doing for
every object in my scene.
The ship, the thrusters, each particle,
the background, and so on.
So for each object,
I'm starting with a push matrix
and applying a transformation to
position that object on screen.
Then here I'm setting up my state.
I'm enabling texture and binding the
appropriate texture ID for this object,
and enabling blending and setting
up the blend function for something
appropriate for an alpha texture.
Then I enable some client
state for a vertex array and
a texture coordinate array,
and set up pointers to those arrays with
GL vertex pointer and text cord pointer.
And then I draw the object by
calling GL draw arrays with a
triangle strip with four vertices,
so that's two triangles or a quad.
Now here's where I undo those
state changes that I made above.
I disable the client state and set this
blend function back to the default.
And then pop the matrix
transformation stack.
And I call glGetError just to
make sure that I'll catch any
errors that might have happened.
Now remember, all of this is being
done for every object,
every particle, and so on in the demo.
So, the thing to understand about
this is that everything you
see here is totally valid code.
It's syntactically correct,
it's a valid usage of OpenGL ES 1.1
in terms that there's no errors here,
and the results on screen
are obviously correct,
you just saw them in the demo.
But actually, everything about this
is just totally wrong,
every single line.
And so we'll spend the
rest of the talk fixing it.
And in particular, this line.
I see this a lot,
where every quad is being
drawn as a separate triangle
strip with four vertices.
Or I've seen some apps doing
the same thing with independent
triangles and six vertices.
And if you're doing this,
if this is what you're using to
do the heavy lifting in your game,
and specifically,
I mean that if your game does
a heavy amount of drawing,
and most or all of that drawing
is through calls to GL draw
arrays with only four vertices,
then let this be the alarm bell that
tells you that something is seriously
wrong and needs to be changed.
So, I'll show you what to do with
this in part three of the talk,
but for the moment,
let's not get too far ahead of ourselves,
and let's see what we need
to do to reduce the number
of state changes in this app.
So let me start just by
reviewing the concept.
So at any given moment,
OpenGL ES defines a current
state of the rendering pipeline.
And this is all done atomically
by doing things like setting the
current matrix transformation or
blending function in OpenGL ES 1.1,
or binding a vertex program
and fragment program in ES 2.0.
And in this example,
when it's time to draw something,
then the current 1.1 state will
be compiled and cached away,
and whatever's being drawn will
take advantage of that state.
And if the next object to be
drawn can also use that state,
then it's very efficient.
It can go through the entire
pipeline without changing anything,
and that's very fast.
But if the next object to be drawn
needs to change a lot of state,
maybe because it uses a different texture
or needs a different blending function,
then conceptually, we need to stop,
compile, and cache that new state,
and then go on to draw that object.
And that little bit of time taken
to set up the new state can really
add up if it's changing a lot or
changing for everything you draw.
So instead, if performance is a
limiting factor for you,
then you should design your
rendering code around the idea
of minimizing state changes.
And how you do this will be
very dependent on the drawing
requirements of your game.
But there's three really
simple techniques that can
have a pretty dramatic effect.
So the first has to do with eliminating
redundant or repetitive state changes.
So the first item is something that
the OpenGL ES Analyzer instrument
makes really easy to find,
and those are redundant state changes,
or cases where you're setting the state
to the same value that it already has.
And the way to eliminate that is
to just keep track of important
state elements yourself.
Like for example,
keep a variable around that holds the
ID of the currently bound texture,
and keep another that tracks
the current blend function,
and so on.
And then before you bind a new texture,
or set a new blend function,
check the value that you're
already holding in your variable.
And if it's the same,
then don't bother issuing
that command to OpenGL.
It's already in that state.
And all you'll be doing is making
OpenGL redo its validation in this
new state that you're setting,
and ultimately it would just end
up right back at the same place.
Now the second item is something the
Analyzer won't necessarily find for you,
but it's easy to spot
in the command trace.
And it's to avoid the situation
where you have unnecessary symmetry
in the way that you're enabling
and disabling various state.
So don't fall into the trap of
setting up a bunch of state,
drawing something,
and then cleaning up all
the state you just said,
just in case something comes along
that needs to do something different.
The next object may actually
need to be drawn with the same
state as the first one you did.
So then you'll just have to go and make
all those same state changes again,
if you had cleaned them up.
And you saw this in the demo code.
Every object is setting a particular
blend function and then restoring it to
the default after that object is drawn.
And then the next object comes along
and repeats that whole process again.
And there's 500 objects doing that
same process in that particular demo.
And it's easier and faster if you
just track the current state and
get rid of any notion that after
you change the state that you need
to put it back the way it was.
Instead,
just be lazy about state changes and
wait until some object comes along that
needs to be rendered with a different
state than what's currently set.
Only actually make the change
then when that happens.
And then third is that you should try
to hoist up any repetitive changes.
Meaning to bring them up out of
the per object rendering routine.
Maybe there's certain states that you're
setting for every object or for many,
many objects.
And rather than setting that
state every time for every object,
just set it once or maybe
once per frame or once for a
particular group of objects.
And then don't change it
on a per object basis.
[Transcript missing]
So to go even further and to
be a little more concrete,
what I really recommend is to change
the order as I've described here.
Start by separating your
rendering code to actually draw
all of the opaque objects first,
and then all the non-opaque objects.
Then within each of those routines,
order your rendering based on the
texture that needs to be bound,
or the shader your objects use,
and so on.
And this can really save you from
making a lot of state changes.
And a third way to eliminate state
changes that's especially relevant
for most games is to combine
multiple individual textures,
if you have them,
into a single larger texture atlas.
So looking at this example,
here's three of the textures for my game,
a starry background texture,
and two more little textures,
one for my lander and the
other for the alien spaceship.
And if I've just set these up
as three separate textures,
then it means I have to bind texture one,
and draw a quad.
Then bind texture two, and draw a quad.
Bind texture three, and draw a quad.
Okay, so that's three texture
binds and three draw calls.
But instead,
if I were to combine these three textures
together into a single texture atlas,
then I could just bind that whole atlas
and use different texture coordinates
to pick out which sub-region I want,
then draw, draw,
and draw to get the same result.
One texture bind instead of three.
And if you have a lot of
small textures in your app,
then you can perhaps reduce all of
them down to just one texture atlas.
All of the more recent devices support
textures sized up to 2048 by 2048,
which is pretty big.
And you can have more
than one texture atlas,
too.
So this is another really
powerful technique for reducing
the number of state changes.
All right, so now let's go back to our
code and apply those changes.
First, this texture enable.
Well, every object in our game
needs to have texture enabled,
and we never disable texture.
So after we've done this once,
it becomes totally redundant to
do it again 500 times a frame.
So we can lift this out of the loop
and just enable it once per frame
or in some initialization routine.
Okay, now this texture bind.
This is currently binding a
different texture for every object,
when we could just create a texture
atlas with all our textures,
and then hoist this call up out of the
loop and just do it once per frame,
or when it actually needs to change.
Okay, next, this call to enable blending.
It's just the same as the
call to enable texture.
It's redundant.
And after we've done it once,
we can just leave it enabled.
So this can get lifted up to an
initialization routine somewhere.
Okay, now these calls,
they're necessary too,
but you'll notice that we're
also disabling them after
the call to GLDrawRays.
So this is one of those cases
of unnecessary symmetry.
So likewise,
we could just set this at the beginning
of the frame and keep track of it,
and only change it if some object
needs to be drawn with it changed.
But either way,
this will get hoisted out of the list
of calls we need to make per object.
Okay, so now let's take a look.
Here's the changes so far.
So we've hoisted all of the state
changes out of the per object loop,
mostly by removing redundant changes and
consolidating our textures into an atlas.
Now, if you had more states to manage,
your app might do these calls per
frame instead of just once it started.
But either way,
moving these calls out of the per
object loop is really important.
Okay, so now let's move on to
optimize what's left.
and we'll focus next on
optimizing the draw calls.
And I have a few good tips
to give for this topic.
The first is to cull
any off-screen objects.
The basic idea here is that
OpenGL ES is going to process
every command you send to it,
even if after a particular
object has been transformed,
it turns out to be off-screen someplace
and doesn't contribute to the scene.
Well, instead,
if you have a simple way to
calculate whether an object
will wind up off-screen,
then there's no need for you to
render it in the first place.
All that work is something
that just can be avoided.
In calculating whether an
object is on or off screen in
a 2D game is generally trivial.
Just a simple position check against
the bounds of the visible area,
or an axis-aligned bounding box check,
which is simple addition or subtraction,
and this might save you the
work of a whole series of
state changes and draw calls.
So you would do this
check for each object.
So imagine that this is my whole level,
and I have enemy spaceships
scattered around,
and perhaps this is the area
that's actually visible right now.
So anything entirely outside
of this imaginary boundary
doesn't need to be drawn.
So as I iterate through
the objects in my scene,
I'm only going to issue draw calls
for the five objects that can be
seen in this frame instead of all 16.
And if in a later frame
I had panned around,
then I'd get a different result,
and I'd only draw those objects.
It's a simple concept,
but really important to apply if you have
a scene with a lot of off-screen objects.
Now the second thing to do,
particularly in 2D games
where there's a lot of quads,
is to flatten the transformations
you'd normally apply with
GeoRotate and GeoTranslate or
GeoMultMatrix into the values of
the vertex positions themselves.
And ultimately what this is going to do
is to let you make longer vertex arrays,
which is the next recommendation.
But to be more specific,
it's very typical for a 2D app
to define the vertex positions
of its quads about the origin,
like -0.5 to +0.5 in X and Y.
And then apply transformations by
calling GeoTranslate and GeoRotate,
and then issuing a draw
call just for that quad,
and then going on to the next one
and repeating that whole process.
Well instead,
what you can do is calculate
that transformation yourself
on the CPU and put those values
directly into your vertex array.
Then next I'll show you how to
combine those arrays together.
Now this is something that
3D games can do as well,
but in 2D games it's absolutely trivial,
even with thousands of vertices.
And it's because calculating 2D
transformations is such simple math.
A 2D translation is just
addition and subtraction,
and a rotate is just sine and cosine.
Let's talk about what
we do with the result.
So the reason why we flatten the
transformation into the vertex
array data is so we can put multiple
objects together into the same array.
And the concept behind this
stems from the fact that vertex
arrays are meant to be very long.
They're meant to be a way of sending a
lot of data to the GPU very efficiently.
So the opposite,
using a whole bunch of really short
arrays totally defeats the purpose.
And we need to find ways
to join them together.
And that's possible if you
have multiple vertex arrays
that all share the same state,
including the transformation.
And if you flatten the transformations
into the vertex data itself,
then they probably have
no other transformations.
Or maybe you can just have the same
overall transformation in common,
which is perfect.
Now,
to actually join them together depends
on whether you're using independent
triangles or triangle strips.
With independent triangles,
there really isn't much.
There isn't much work to do at all.
You just make the array big enough
and keep adding triangles to it,
and make it as long as possible
for as many triangles as you
have that share the same state.
But the other possibility,
and what I'm showing here,
is if you use triangle strips.
We still want to create a single long
array that combines them all together,
but how do you handle the separation
between the original arrays?
Well, we use something called degenerate
triangles to join these strips together.
And what we do is to repeat the
first and last vertex of each strip.
The result is one longer strip,
and the repeated vertices
never get rasterized.
So the strips will appear to
be separately placed on screen,
but they're able to be submitted to
the GPU together in a single draw call.
So here we have triangles ABC, BCD,
and CDE, which get rasterized normally.
And then still, in the same strip,
we have DEE, and EEF, and EFF, and FFG,
which are really lines, not triangles.
So they're not valid,
and nothing gets rasterized.
And then finally we get
back to triangles again,
with FGH, GHI, and HIJ.
So in this example,
instead of two strips with two draw
calls and three triangles each,
we get one strip, or one draw call,
with six triangles that
actually get rasterized.
And we just keep applying that for
all of the objects in the scene.
Now, either of those techniques are
fantastic for the situation
that hopefully we're in now,
where we've sorted all of
our rendering by state,
we're using texture atlases
to hold all of our textures
and cut down on state changes,
and we flatten transformations
into our vertex array data.
So if we can also make longer arrays,
either by switching over to
independent triangles and just
throwing them all into a big array,
or by taking our triangle strips
and using degenerate triangles
to join them all together,
then in many cases,
we could end up drawing all of
our quads in our game in one or
sometimes just a few draw calls.
So let's say these five
quads were defined as strips
with four vertices each,
and they all share the same state.
They're all sorted, texture atlased,
and flattened.
Then I can combine all of these
together into one single vertex array,
and I combine one texture atlas,
and I set the vertex pointer,
and do the same work for my
texture coordinate array,
and then draw my entire scene
in one call to GLDrawArrays.
And the performance difference
between this and what we started
with would just be incredible.
All right,
so now let's go back to our code
and apply those changes too.
So for each object.
Well, actually,
we're going to change this.
And instead of drawing each object,
we're first going to calculate whether
that object will be visible on screen,
and only proceed if it is.
Okay, now here's our transformations.
We'll remove these by flattening
them into our vertex array data.
And here's where we set up the pointers
to our arrays and call GLDrawArrays.
Well, this will change to construct
the arrays on the fly,
either using independent triangles,
or by joining triangle strips
together with degenerate triangles.
Okay, so now let's take a look.
Here's what that would become.
So now there's some work I'm
doing at the initialization
time at the top to set up state.
Then the part that's highlighted
is what I'm doing each frame.
I'll start out now and for each object,
if it's visible,
then I'll flatten the transformations
and add it to a combined array.
Then once I've gone through all the
objects at the end of the frame,
I'll set up my array pointers
and call GLDrawArrays with
the whole combined array.
So, the thing to notice is
that when we started,
I was making 16 GL calls
for every object.
It was almost 8,000 GL calls
being made per frame.
Now, there's no GL calls being
made for every object.
I'm just doing calculations on the
CPU to add the objects that are
visible into a big vertex array.
And then I'm making a
draw call once per frame.
So, the difference should be dramatic.
So let me show you that difference.
And at the same time,
I'll show what to look at for
some further optimizations.
So let's go back to the demo
and then take a look at the
OpenGL ES Analyzer Expert.
All right,
so let's start by taking another
look at the demo as it existed
originally before we made our changes.
So you can see it again here.
And it's running pretty slow.
We have the 500 draw calls resulting
in 1,000 triangles or 500 quads.
And it's taking about 8,000
GL calls to draw this.
Okay, so there it is.
So now let's look at the version that
integrates the changes that we just made.
You can see it's much, much faster.
So, and the performance here is great,
but I can even crank up
the number of particles,
and it still is able to maintain
completely fluid motion and able
to maintain that performance.
So, all I've done here are the things
that I've shown in this talk,
where I've converted
over to texture atlases,
I've removed a lot of state,
and I'm using degenerate triangles in
this case to join vertex arrays together.
And a few other things that,
just like I had mentioned,
I'm culling off-screen objects and so on.
Okay, so now let's take a look at
how this actually runs in the
OpenGL ES Analyzer instrument.
So I'll switch over to the new
version and record a few frames.
So it's running on my phone now.
And I'm just counting
up a few frames here.
Now you can see even just in
this short amount of time,
I've gotten what about 30 times
as many frames as I did before.
But so now let's take a look at
the same things that we saw before.
Frame statistics first.
I'll turn this over.
So here's the number of triangles
that we're rendering per frame.
It's changing.
838, 832, 862.
The reason for that is because I'm
culling any off-screen particles.
And their position is defined randomly,
so the number that actually end
up on screen changes each frame.
But so that's why this number
is less than a thousand,
which is what I had
originally started with.
But look here, the number of batches,
instead of it being 500, it's now one.
Just one draw call to get all 838
or 832 triangles drawn on screen.
And then over here,
the number of GL calls
per frame is also really,
really low.
Just four GL calls instead of 8,000.
So let's take a look at the trace.
So this is the trace.
For all of the GL calls that were made
for the lifetime of the application,
let's go to single frame navigation
and just look at one frame.
And here is the trace of calls that
we're making in a single frame.
All I'm doing is binding a texture.
This is the ID for my texture atlas.
I'm setting up my vertex pointer
and texture coordinate pointer.
And in this particular frame,
I'm drawing a triangle
strip with 1,050 vertices,
so 1,048 triangles.
So that is just amazing.
I mean,
we are able to take the entire scene.
So this includes the background,
this includes the lander,
all of the particles,
and the fuel display, and so on.
We're taking all of those objects
and drawing everything that's on
screen in just one call to GLDrawRays.
And so it's obvious that's going to
be a lot more efficient than calling
16 different GL calls plus a separate
call to GLDrawRays for each of 500
or 1,000 different objects on screen.
But okay, so that is a look at the
changes that we made.
But now I want to, as I said,
I want to show you one more thing and
that is the OpenGL ES Analyzer Expert.
And so actually what I want to do is
go back to the original version of
the app and see what it finds for us.
So I'm going to run it again,
and let it store up a few frames here.
Okay, that's probably far enough.
And now,
this information down here is what the
OpenGL ES analyzer expert will tell you.
And what, let me zoom in.
What you see are different categories
of problems or issues that it's found,
the summary of what that issue is,
then over here also,
the number of times that that issue
occurred for the life of the application,
and the number of unique places in
your source code that it came from.
And then there's one more
thing that I can look at also.
If I click on a particular issue here,
I can open up a view which will
give me extended detail about this,
with a recommendation that you can
make in your code for a change to make.
And then also,
it'll tell you the exact stack trace
that this issue was coming from.
So in this particular example,
let's open this up.
I have all of these are
redundant state changes,
redundant calls.
And a few of them are only happening
once in the lifetime of the application,
or a few times in the lifetime.
So they don't really matter.
But here, let's look at this one,
glenable, gltexture2d.
So this is being done more
than 24,000 times so far in
the life of the application.
And what it's saying up here, well, okay,
this command was redundant, glenable,
gltexture2d,
and this command was redundant, glenable,
gltexture2d.
So this is being done more
than 24,000 times so far in the
lifetime of the application.
And what it's saying up here, well, okay,
this command was redundant, gltexture2d,
and this command was redundant,
gltexture2d.
This is the routine
that it's coming from.
If I double click this,
it will take me into my source code,
and I can start making changes
directly at that point.
So this is a really powerful tool for
finding issues in your application.
So let's look at a couple more.
So a few more things
that are happening here.
Well, here's one.
It's saying, okay,
you have many small batch draw calls.
And let's drill in on some
information about that.
Okay, it's saying, ah,
this call to GL draw arrays with a
GL triangle strip and only four vertices.
Okay, that's a problem.
Here's the trace where it's coming from.
But now let's go back and see
what it wants me to do about it.
So it says up here,
OpenGL ES Analyzer detected a
number of draw calls containing
a small number of primitives.
Remember,
four vertices only in the original
version of this application.
So there may be an opportunity to
combine several small draw calls into
a single larger draw call in order
to gain a performance improvement.
So to do that,
I used degenerate triangles to
fix that particular problem.
But here is where it's being called
out using the OpenGL ES Analyzer.
So the point of this isn't just to
go back and repeat everything that
we talked about in this talk today,
but it's to show you that you
actually don't have to be an
expert to know what to go tune.
This expert system will actually
tell you all of the things that are
happening in your application that you
should go and take another look at.
Let's look at just a couple more.
State query call count.
You know, I didn't do anything with
this one in the slides,
but let's see what it's talking about.
It said that I had called
something 500 times.
Let's see what it is.
Ah, it says call to GL get error.
Yeah, I hadn't addressed that.
But here we are again.
The analyzer expert is
telling me something to fix.
It's saying, you know,
you really don't need to be
calling GL get error so often.
Really,
you should just get rid of that from
the production version of your code,
and only use it for testing.
But the reason why it's calling it out,
let's look at the recommendation up here.
OpenGL ES Analyzer detected a number of
state query calls in the current frame.
Use state query calls sparingly
from within the main rendering loop.
State query calls are any
functions that begin with glGet,
glIs, or glRead.
So that's great advice.
And it shows me exactly where in
my stack trace this is coming from.
Great.
So I really encourage you to download
Xcode 4 if you haven't already,
and try out the new
OpenGL ES Analyzer instrument.
And then let the analyzer expert tell
you where and how you can tune your app.
Now probably a lot of that tuning
will mean eliminating state changes
and optimizing your draw calls.
And you can apply the techniques I've
shown in this talk to do those things.
And finally,
here's my contact information
if you have any questions about
the content presented here,
and a link to the iOS
Dev Center for documentation,
sample code, and our developer forums.
Thanks for watching.